docs/source/overlay_design_methodology/data_transfer.rst, before:

*******************************
PS/PL data movement
*******************************

Introduction
==================


There are four PYNQ classes that are used to manage data movement between the Zynq PS (including the PS DRAM) and PL. 

* MMIO - Memory Mapped IO
* Xlnk - Memory allocation
* DMA  - Direct Memory Access
* GPIO - General Purpose Input/Output

The class used depends on the Zynq PS interface the IP is connected to, and the interface of the IP. 

Zynq interfaces
====================

AXI interfaces are the main connections for transferring data between the PS and the PL. 

The Zynq has 2 AXI GP (General Purpose) masters (master from PS to PL) and 2 AXI GP slaves (slave from PS to PL), 4 AXI HP (High Performance) slaves, and one ACP AXI slave. An AXI master can be connected to either a HP port or the ACP port. 


IP Interfaces
=======================

There are four main interface types for IP blocks.

* AXI4 Slave
* AXI4 Master
* AXI4 Stream
* GPIO


AXI4 Slave
----------------

An AXI4 slave can be connected to an AXI GP Master port. 
 
.. image:: ../images/axi_lite_slave.png
   :align: center

The AXI GP port on Zynq is usually used for lower performance IP, or for control interfaces. 

AXI4 Master
-------------------

An AXI4 Master can be connected to the AXI GP Slave ports, HP ports, or ACP. 

.. image:: ../images/axi4_master.png
   :align: center

HP ports are usually used for high performance peripherals that need access to DRAM. For example, a video controller can write video data to DRAM through a HP port without any interaction from the main CPU. 

AXI4 Stream
----------------

AXI4 streams are data channels and have no address signals. This means they need an IP block to convert memory mapped transactions in the PS to stream transactions and vice versa. A DMA is one way to do this. A DMA can have an AXI lite control interface connected to an AXI GP Master port, and AXI4 Master port connected to a HP port to access DDR, and an AXI4 stream port to connect to the AXI stream. The AXI lite control port can be used to initiate a transaction, data can be read from the DRAM and sent to the AXI4 stream, or received from the AXI stream and sent to DRAM. 

.. image:: ../images/axi4_stream_dma.png
   :align: center


GPIO
--------------

There are also GPIO, which are simple wires between PS and PL.  

.. image:: ../images/gpio_interface.png
   :align: center

GPIO wires from the PS can be used as a very simple way to communicate between PS and PL. For example, GPIO can be used as control signals for resets, or interrupts. 

PYNQ classes 
===============


MMIO
--------------

MMIO can be used read/write a memory mapped location. A MMIO read or write command can transfer 32 bits of data. MMIO is most appropriate for reading and writing small amounts of data.

The following example sets up an MMIO instance to access memory location from the IP_BASE_ADDRESS (0x40000000) to the IP_BASE_ADDRESS + ADDRESS RANGE (0x40001000).

Some *data* (e.g. 0xdeadbeef) is sent to location ADDRESS_OFFSET (0x10). ADDRESS_OFFSET is offset from the IP base address IP_BASE_ADDRESS. This means 0xdeadbeef will be written to 0x40000010. 

The same location is then read and stored in *result*. 

.. code-block:: Python

   IP_BASE_ADDRESS = 0x40000000
   ADDRESS_RANGE = 0x1000
   ADDRESS_OFFSET = 0x10
   
   from pynq import MMIO   
   mmio = MMIO(IP_BASE_ADDRESS, ADDRESS_RANGE) 

   data = 0xdeadbeef
   self.mmio.write(ADDRESS_OFFSET, data)
   result = self.mmio.read(ADDRESS_OFFSET)

This example assumes the memory mapped area defined for the MMIO, 0x40000000 - 0x40001000, is accessible to the PS. 


Interrupt
----------

The ``Interrupt`` class represents a single interrupt pin in the block design. It mimics a python ``Event`` by having a single ``wait`` function that blocks until the interrupt is raised. The event will be cleared automatically when te interrupt is cleared. To construct an event, pass in fully quallified path to the pin in the block diagram, e.g. ``'my_ip/interrupt'`` as the only argument. 

The implementation is built on top of asyncio, a newly added part of the python standard library. For more details on asyncio, how it can be used with PYNQ see the asyncio section of this documentation.

Xlnk
--------------

Memory must be allocated before it can be accessed by the IP.
``Xlnk`` allows memory buffers to be allocated. Xlnk allocates a contiguous memory buffer which allows efficient transfers of data between PS and PL. Python or other code running in Linux on the PS can access the memory buffer directly. 

As PYNQ is running Linux, the buffer will exist in the Linux virtual memory. The Zynq AXI Slave ports allow an AXI-master IP in an overlay to access physical memory. Xlnk can also provide the physical memory pointer to the buffer which can be sent to an IP in the overlay. The physical address is stored in the ``physical_address`` property of the allocated memory buffer instance. An IP in an overlay can then access the same buffer using the physical address. 

For example, a program running on a MicroBlaze processor in an overlay may need to write data to main memory so that it could be read in Python. First, the memory can be allocated in Linux using Xlnk. Then the physical pointer is sent to the MicroBlaze, and finally the MicroBlaze program and write data to the memory buffer using the pointer. 

Xlnk can allocate arrays using the Python NumPy package. This allows the data type, and size/shape of the array to be specified using NumPy. 

Xlnk is also used implicitly by the DMA class to allocate memory. 


Xlnk example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create an Xlnk instance, *xlnk* and use ``cma_array()`` to allocate a *unsigned 32-bit int* contiguous block of memory of 5 elements:

Allocating the memory buffer:

   .. code-block:: Python

      from pynq import Xlnk
      import numpy as np

      xlnk = Xlnk()
      input_buffer = xlnk.cma_array(shape=(5,), dtype=np.uint32)


``physical_address`` property of the memory buffer:

   .. code-block:: Python
   
      input_buffer.physical_address

Writing data to the buffer:

   .. code-block:: Python
   
      for i in range(5):
          input_buffer[i] = i
          
      # Input buffer:  [0 1 2 3 4]


DMA
--------------

The PYNQ DMA class supports the `AXI Direct Memory Access IP <https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/ip_documentation/axi_dma/v7_1/pg021_axi_dma.pdf>`_. 
This allows data to be read from DRAM, and sent to an AXI stream, or received from a stream and written to DRAM. 


DMA example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This example assumes the overlay contains two AXI Direct Memory Access IP, one with a read channel from DRAM, and an AXI Master stream interface (for an output stream), and the other with a write channel to DRAM, and an AXI Slave stream interface (for an input stream). The two DMAs are connected in a loopback configuration through an AXI FIFO

In the Python code, two DMA instances are created, one for sending data, and the other for receiving. 

Two memory buffers, one for input, and the other for output are allocated. 

   .. code-block:: Python

      import pynq.lib.dma
      from pynq import Xlnk
      import numpy as np

      xlnk = Xlnk()

      dma_send = ol.axi_dma_from_ps_to_pl 
      dma_recv = ol.axi_dma_from_pl_to_ps 

      input_buffer = xlnk.cma_array(shape=(5,), dtype=np.uint32)
      output_buffer = xlnk.cma_array(shape=(5,), dtype=np.uint32)

Write some data to the array:

   .. code-block:: Python
   
      for i in range(5):
          input_buffer[i] = i 
      # Input buffer:  [0 1 2 3 4]

Transfer the input_buffer to the *send* DMA, and read back from the *recv* DMA to the output buffer. The ``wait()`` method ensures the DMA transactions have complete. 

   .. code-block:: Python
      
      dma_send.sendchannel.transfer(input_buffer)
      dma_recv.recvchannel.transfer(output_buffer)
      dma_send.sendchannel.wait()
      dma_recv.recvchannel.wait()
      
      # Output buffer:  [0 1 2 3 4]

Commit message:

Add Interrupt architecture to data transfer

docs/source/overlay_design_methodology/data_transfer.rst, after:

*******************************
PS/PL data movement
*******************************

Introduction
==================


There are four PYNQ classes that are used to manage data movement between the Zynq PS (including the PS DRAM) and PL. 

* MMIO - Memory Mapped IO
* Xlnk - Memory allocation
* DMA  - Direct Memory Access
* GPIO - General Purpose Input/Output

The class used depends on the Zynq PS interface the IP is connected to, and the interface of the IP. 

Zynq interfaces
====================

AXI interfaces are the main connections for transferring data between the PS and the PL. 

The Zynq has 2 AXI GP (General Purpose) masters (master from PS to PL) and 2 AXI GP slaves (slave from PS to PL), 4 AXI HP (High Performance) slaves, and one ACP AXI slave. An AXI master can be connected to either a HP port or the ACP port. 


IP Interfaces
=======================

There are four main interface types for IP blocks.

* AXI4 Slave
* AXI4 Master
* AXI4 Stream
* GPIO


AXI4 Slave
----------------

An AXI4 slave can be connected to an AXI GP Master port. 
 
.. image:: ../images/axi_lite_slave.png
   :align: center

The AXI GP port on Zynq is usually used for lower performance IP, or for control interfaces. 

AXI4 Master
-------------------

An AXI4 Master can be connected to the AXI GP Slave ports, HP ports, or ACP. 

.. image:: ../images/axi4_master.png
   :align: center

HP ports are usually used for high performance peripherals that need access to DRAM. For example, a video controller can write video data to DRAM through a HP port without any interaction from the main CPU. 

AXI4 Stream
----------------

AXI4 streams are data channels and have no address signals. This means they need an IP block to convert memory mapped transactions in the PS to stream transactions and vice versa. A DMA is one way to do this. A DMA can have an AXI lite control interface connected to an AXI GP Master port, and AXI4 Master port connected to a HP port to access DDR, and an AXI4 stream port to connect to the AXI stream. The AXI lite control port can be used to initiate a transaction, data can be read from the DRAM and sent to the AXI4 stream, or received from the AXI stream and sent to DRAM. 

.. image:: ../images/axi4_stream_dma.png
   :align: center


GPIO
--------------

There are also GPIO, which are simple wires between PS and PL.  

.. image:: ../images/gpio_interface.png
   :align: center

GPIO wires from the PS can be used as a very simple way to communicate between PS and PL. For example, GPIO can be used as control signals for resets, or interrupts. 


Interrupts
-------------

Finally there are dedicated interrupts which are linked with asyncio events in the python environment. Dedicated interrupts should be attached to an AXI Interrupt controller which is in turn attached to the first interrupt line to the processing system. This arrangement leaves the other interrupts free for IP not controlled by PYNQ directly such as SDSoC accelerators.


PYNQ classes 
===============


MMIO
--------------

MMIO can be used read/write a memory mapped location. A MMIO read or write command can transfer 32 bits of data. MMIO is most appropriate for reading and writing small amounts of data.

The following example sets up an MMIO instance to access memory location from the IP_BASE_ADDRESS (0x40000000) to the IP_BASE_ADDRESS + ADDRESS RANGE (0x40001000).

Some *data* (e.g. 0xdeadbeef) is sent to location ADDRESS_OFFSET (0x10). ADDRESS_OFFSET is offset from the IP base address IP_BASE_ADDRESS. This means 0xdeadbeef will be written to 0x40000010. 

The same location is then read and stored in *result*. 

.. code-block:: Python

   IP_BASE_ADDRESS = 0x40000000
   ADDRESS_RANGE = 0x1000
   ADDRESS_OFFSET = 0x10
   
   from pynq import MMIO   
   mmio = MMIO(IP_BASE_ADDRESS, ADDRESS_RANGE) 

   data = 0xdeadbeef
   self.mmio.write(ADDRESS_OFFSET, data)
   result = self.mmio.read(ADDRESS_OFFSET)

This example assumes the memory mapped area defined for the MMIO, 0x40000000 - 0x40001000, is accessible to the PS. 


Interrupt
----------

The ``Interrupt`` class represents a single interrupt pin in the block design. It mimics a python ``Event`` by having a single ``wait`` function that blocks until the interrupt is raised. The event will be cleared automatically when te interrupt is cleared. To construct an event, pass in fully quallified path to the pin in the block diagram, e.g. ``'my_ip/interrupt'`` as the only argument. 

The implementation is built on top of asyncio, a newly added part of the python standard library. For more details on asyncio, how it can be used with PYNQ see the asyncio section of this documentation.

Xlnk
--------------

Memory must be allocated before it can be accessed by the IP.
``Xlnk`` allows memory buffers to be allocated. Xlnk allocates a contiguous memory buffer which allows efficient transfers of data between PS and PL. Python or other code running in Linux on the PS can access the memory buffer directly. 

As PYNQ is running Linux, the buffer will exist in the Linux virtual memory. The Zynq AXI Slave ports allow an AXI-master IP in an overlay to access physical memory. Xlnk can also provide the physical memory pointer to the buffer which can be sent to an IP in the overlay. The physical address is stored in the ``physical_address`` property of the allocated memory buffer instance. An IP in an overlay can then access the same buffer using the physical address. 

For example, a program running on a MicroBlaze processor in an overlay may need to write data to main memory so that it could be read in Python. First, the memory can be allocated in Linux using Xlnk. Then the physical pointer is sent to the MicroBlaze, and finally the MicroBlaze program and write data to the memory buffer using the pointer. 

Xlnk can allocate arrays using the Python NumPy package. This allows the data type, and size/shape of the array to be specified using NumPy. 

Xlnk is also used implicitly by the DMA class to allocate memory. 


Xlnk example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create an Xlnk instance, *xlnk* and use ``cma_array()`` to allocate a *unsigned 32-bit int* contiguous block of memory of 5 elements:

Allocating the memory buffer:

   .. code-block:: Python

      from pynq import Xlnk
      import numpy as np

      xlnk = Xlnk()
      input_buffer = xlnk.cma_array(shape=(5,), dtype=np.uint32)


``physical_address`` property of the memory buffer:

   .. code-block:: Python
   
      input_buffer.physical_address

Writing data to the buffer:

   .. code-block:: Python
   
      for i in range(5):
          input_buffer[i] = i
          
      # Input buffer:  [0 1 2 3 4]


DMA
--------------

The PYNQ DMA class supports the `AXI Direct Memory Access IP <https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/ip_documentation/axi_dma/v7_1/pg021_axi_dma.pdf>`_. 
This allows data to be read from DRAM, and sent to an AXI stream, or received from a stream and written to DRAM. 


DMA example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This example assumes the overlay contains two AXI Direct Memory Access IP, one with a read channel from DRAM, and an AXI Master stream interface (for an output stream), and the other with a write channel to DRAM, and an AXI Slave stream interface (for an input stream). The two DMAs are connected in a loopback configuration through an AXI FIFO

In the Python code, two DMA instances are created, one for sending data, and the other for receiving. 

Two memory buffers, one for input, and the other for output are allocated. 

   .. code-block:: Python

      import pynq.lib.dma
      from pynq import Xlnk
      import numpy as np

      xlnk = Xlnk()

      dma_send = ol.axi_dma_from_ps_to_pl 
      dma_recv = ol.axi_dma_from_pl_to_ps 

      input_buffer = xlnk.cma_array(shape=(5,), dtype=np.uint32)
      output_buffer = xlnk.cma_array(shape=(5,), dtype=np.uint32)

Write some data to the array:

   .. code-block:: Python
   
      for i in range(5):
          input_buffer[i] = i 
      # Input buffer:  [0 1 2 3 4]

Transfer the input_buffer to the *send* DMA, and read back from the *recv* DMA to the output buffer. The ``wait()`` method ensures the DMA transactions have complete. 

   .. code-block:: Python
      
      dma_send.sendchannel.transfer(input_buffer)
      dma_recv.recvchannel.transfer(output_buffer)
      dma_send.sendchannel.wait()
      dma_recv.recvchannel.wait()
      
      # Output buffer:  [0 1 2 3 4]
