docs/source/overlay_design_methodology/overlay_design.rst, before:

Overlay design
=======================

An overlay consists of two main parts; the PL design (bitstream) and the project block diagram Tcl file. Overlay design is a specialized task for hardware engineers. This section assumes the reader has some experience with digital design, building Zynq systems, and with the Vivado design tools. 

PL Design
------------------

The Xilinx® Vivado software is used to create a Zynq design. A *bitstream* or *binary* file (.bit file) will be generated that can be used to program the Zynq PL.

A free WebPack version of Vivado is available to build overlays.
https://www.xilinx.com/products/design-tools/vivado/vivado-webpack.html


Overlay Tcl file
--------------------

The Tcl from the Vivado IP Integrator block design for the PL design is used by PYNQ to automatically identify the Zynq system configuration, IP including versions, interrupts, resets, and other control signals. Based on this information, some parts of the system configuration can be automatically modified from PYNQ, drivers can be automatically assigned, features can be enabled or disabled, and signals can be connected to corresponding Python methods. 

The Tcl file must be generated and provided with the bitstream file as part of an overlay. The Tcl file can be generated in Vivado by *exporting* the IP Integrator block diagram at the end of the overlay design process. The Tcl file should be provided with a bitstream when downloading an overlay. The PYNQ PL class will automatically parse the Tcl. 

A custom, or manually created Tcl file can be used to build a Vivado project, but Vivado should be used to generate and export the Tcl file for the block diagram. This automatically generated Tcl should ensure that it can be parsed correctly by the PYNQ. 

Generate overlay Tcl file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To generate the Tcl for the Block Diagram from the Vivado GUI:

   * Click **File > Export > Block Design**  

Or, run the following in the Tcl console:

.. code-block:: console

   write_bd_tcl
      
The Tcl filename should match the .bit filename. E.g. my_overlay.bit and my_overlay.tcl

The Tcl is parsed when the overlay is instantiated and downloaded. 

.. code-block:: python

   from pynq import Overlay
   ol = Overlay("base.bit") # Tcl is parsed here

   
An error will be displayed if a Tcl is not available when attempting to download an overlay, or if the Tcl filename does not match the .bit file name.


Programmability
-----------------

An overlay should have post-bitstream programmability to allow customization of the system. A number of reusable PYNQ IP blocks are available to support programmability. For example, an IOP can be used on Pmod, and Arduino interfaces. IP from the PYNQ DIO overlay can be reused to provide run-time configurability. 

See the previous section on `PYNQ IP <../pynq_ip_index.html>`_

Zynq PS settings
------------------

A Vivado project for a Zynq design consists of two parts; the PL design, and the PS configuration settings. 

The PYNQ image which is used to boot the board configures the Zynq PS at boot time. This will fix most of the PS configuration, including setup of DRAM, and enabling of the Zynq PS peripherals, including SD card, Ethernet, USB and UART which are used by PYNQ. 

The PS configuration also includes settings for system clocks, including the clocks used in the PL. The PL clocks can be programmed at runtime to match the requirements of the overlay. This is managed automatically by the PYNQ Overlay class. 

During the process of downloading a new overlay, the clock configuration will be parsed from the overlay's Tcl file. The new clock settings for the overlay will be applied automatically before the overlay is downloaded. 


Existing Overlays
=========================

Existing overlays can be used as a starting point to create a new overlay. The *base* overlay can be found in the *boards* directory in the Pynq repository, and includes reference IP for peripherals on the board: 

   ``<GitHub repository>/boards/<board name>/vivado/base``
  
A makefile exists in each folder that can be used to rebuild the Vivado project and generate the bitstream and Tcl for the overlay. (On windows, instead of using *make*, the Tcl file can be sourced from Vivado.)

The bitstream and Tcl for the overlay are available on the board, and also in the GitHub project repository: 

   ``<GitHub Repository>/boards/<board name>/bitstream/``

Commit message:

RTD code fixes
 Fixing autodoc issues in video.py
 Checking CPU_ARCH before creating Overlay instances in test_pl.py

docs/source/overlay_design_methodology/overlay_design.rst, after:

Overlay design
=======================

An overlay consists of two main parts; the PL design (bitstream) and the project block diagram Tcl file. Overlay design is a specialized task for hardware engineers. This section assumes the reader has some experience with digital design, building Zynq systems, and with the Vivado design tools. 

PL Design
------------------

The Xilinx® Vivado software is used to create a Zynq design. A *bitstream* or *binary* file (.bit file) will be generated that can be used to program the Zynq PL.

A free WebPack version of Vivado is available to build overlays.
https://www.xilinx.com/products/design-tools/vivado/vivado-webpack.html

The hardware designer is encouraged to support programmability in the IP used in a PYNQ overlays. Once the IP has been created, the PL design is carried out in the same way as any other Zynq design. IP in an overlay that can be controlled by PYNQ will be memory mapped, connected to GPIO. IP may also have a master connection to the PL. PYNQ provides Python libraries to interface to the PL design and which can be used to create their own drivers. The Python API for an overlay will be and will be covered in the next sections. 

Vivado board and constraint files PYNQ-Z1
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Vivado board files can be installed to make it easier to create a new project. 

* `PYNQ-Z1 Vivado board files <https://github.com/cathalmccabe/pynq-z1_board_files/raw/master/pynq-z1.zip>`_

To install the board files, extract the board file archive, and copy the board files folder to:

   .. code-block:: console

      <Xilinx installation directory>\Vivado\<version>\data\boards

* `Download the PYNQ-Z1 Master XDC constarints <https://reference.digilentinc.com/_media/reference/programmable-logic/pynq-z1/pynq-z1_c.zip>`_

Overlay Tcl file
--------------------

The Tcl from the Vivado IP Integrator block design for the PL design is used by PYNQ to automatically identify the Zynq system configuration, IP including versions, interrupts, resets, and other control signals. Based on this information, some parts of the system configuration can be automatically modified from PYNQ, drivers can be automatically assigned, features can be enabled or disabled, and signals can be connected to corresponding Python methods. 

The Tcl file must be generated and provided with the bitstream file as part of an overlay. The Tcl file can be generated in Vivado by *exporting* the IP Integrator block diagram at the end of the overlay design process. The Tcl file should be provided with a bitstream when downloading an overlay. The PYNQ PL class will automatically parse the Tcl. 

A custom, or manually created Tcl file can be used to build a Vivado project, but Vivado should be used to generate and export the Tcl file for the block diagram. This automatically generated Tcl should ensure that it can be parsed correctly by the PYNQ. 

Generate overlay Tcl file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To generate the Tcl for the Block Diagram from the Vivado GUI:

   * Click **File > Export > Block Design**  

Or, run the following in the Tcl console:

.. code-block:: console

   write_bd_tcl
      
The Tcl filename should match the .bit filename. E.g. my_overlay.bit and my_overlay.tcl

The Tcl is parsed when the overlay is instantiated and downloaded. 

.. code-block:: python

   from pynq import Overlay
   ol = Overlay("base.bit") # Tcl is parsed here

   
An error will be displayed if a Tcl is not available when attempting to download an overlay, or if the Tcl filename does not match the .bit file name.


Programmability
-----------------

An overlay should have post-bitstream programmability to allow customization of the system. A number of reusable PYNQ IP blocks are available to support programmability. For example, an IOP can be used on Pmod, and Arduino interfaces. IP from the PYNQ DIO overlay can be reused to provide run-time configurability. 

See the previous section on `PYNQ IP <../pynq_ip_index.html>`_

Zynq PS settings
------------------

A Vivado project for a Zynq design consists of two parts; the PL design, and the PS configuration settings. 

The PYNQ image which is used to boot the board configures the Zynq PS at boot time. This will fix most of the PS configuration, including setup of DRAM, and enabling of the Zynq PS peripherals, including SD card, Ethernet, USB and UART which are used by PYNQ. 

The PS configuration also includes settings for system clocks, including the clocks used in the PL. The PL clocks can be programmed at runtime to match the requirements of the overlay. This is managed automatically by the PYNQ Overlay class. 

During the process of downloading a new overlay, the clock configuration will be parsed from the overlay's Tcl file. The new clock settings for the overlay will be applied automatically before the overlay is downloaded. 


Existing Overlays
-----------------------

Existing overlays can be used as a starting point to create a new overlay. The *base* overlay can be found in the *boards* directory in the Pynq repository, and includes reference IP for peripherals on the board: 

   ``<GitHub repository>/boards/<board name>/vivado/base``
  
A makefile exists in each folder that can be used to rebuild the Vivado project and generate the bitstream and Tcl for the overlay. (On windows, instead of using *make*, the Tcl file can be sourced from Vivado.)

The bitstream and Tcl for the overlay are available on the board, and also in the GitHub project repository: 

   ``<GitHub Repository>/boards/<board name>/bitstream/``
